The name of the public-house was the Pegasus’s Arms. The Pegasus’s legs might have been more to the purpose; but, underneath the winged horse upon the signboard, the Pegasus’s Arms was inscribed in Roman letters. Beneath that inscription again, in a flowing scroll, the painter had touched off the lines:

Good malt makes good beer,
Walk in, and they’ll draw it here;
Good wine makes good brandy,
Give us a call, and you’ll find it handy.

Framed and glazed upon the wall behind the dingy little bar, was another Pegasus⁠—a theatrical one⁠—with real gauze let in for his wings, golden stars stuck on all over him, and his ethereal harness made of red silk.

As it had grown too dusky without, to see the sign, and as it had not grown light enough within to see the picture, Mr. Gradgrind and Mr. Bounderby received no offence from these idealities. They followed the girl up some steep corner-stairs without meeting anyone, and stopped in the dark while she went on for a candle. They expected every moment to hear Merrylegs give tongue, but the highly trained performing dog had not barked when the girl and the candle appeared together.

“Father is not in our room, sir,” she said, with a face of great surprise. “If you wouldn’t mind walking in, I’ll find him directly.” They walked in; and Sissy, having set two chairs for them, sped away with a quick light step. It was a mean, shabbily furnished room, with a bed in it. The white nightcap, embellished with two peacock’s feathers and a pigtail bolt upright, in which Signor Jupe had that very afternoon enlivened the varied performances with his chaste Shakespearean quips and retorts, hung upon a nail; but no other portion of his wardrobe, or other token of himself or his pursuits, was to be seen anywhere. As to Merrylegs, that respectable ancestor of the highly trained animal who went aboard the ark, might have been accidentally shut out of it, for any sign of a dog that was manifest to eye or ear in the Pegasus’s Arms.

They heard the doors of rooms above, opening and shutting as Sissy went from one to another in quest of her father; and presently they heard voices expressing surprise. She came bounding down again in a great hurry, opened a battered and mangy old hair trunk, found it empty, and looked round with her hands clasped and her face full of terror.

“Father must have gone down to the Booth, sir. I don’t know why he should go there, but he must be there; I’ll bring him in a minute!” She was gone directly, without her bonnet; with her long, dark, childish hair streaming behind her.

“What does she mean!” said Mr. Gradgrind. “Back in a minute? It’s more than a mile off.”

Before Mr. Bounderby could reply, a young man appeared at the door, and introducing himself with the words, “By your leaves, gentlemen!” walked in with his hands in his pockets. His face, close-shaven, thin, and sallow, was shaded by a great quantity of dark hair, brushed into a roll all round his head, and parted up the centre. His legs were very robust, but shorter than legs of good proportions should have been. His chest and back were as much too broad, as his legs were too short. He was dressed in a Newmarket coat and tight-fitting trousers; wore a shawl round his neck; smelt of lamp-oil, straw, orange-peel, horses’ provender, and sawdust; and looked a most remarkable sort of Centaur, compounded of the stable and the playhouse. Where the one began, and the other ended, nobody could have told with any precision. This gentleman was mentioned in the bills of the day as Mr. E. W. B. Childers, so justly celebrated for his daring vaulting act as the Wild Huntsman of the North American Prairies; in which popular performance, a diminutive boy with an old face, who now accompanied him, assisted as his infant son: being carried upside down over his father’s shoulder, by one foot, and held by the crown of his head, heels upwards, in the palm of his father’s hand, according to the violent paternal manner in which wild huntsmen may be observed to fondle their offspring. Made up with curls, wreaths, wings, white bismuth, and carmine, this hopeful young person soared into so pleasing a Cupid as to constitute the chief delight of the maternal part of the spectators; but in private, where his characteristics were a precocious cutaway coat and an extremely gruff voice, he became of the Turf, turfy.

“By your leaves, gentlemen,” said Mr. E. W. B. Childers, glancing round the room. “It was you, I believe, that were wishing to see Jupe!”

“It was,” said Mr. Gradgrind. “His daughter has gone to fetch him, but I can’t wait; therefore, if you please, I will leave a message for him with you.”

“You see, my friend,” Mr. Bounderby put in, “we are the kind of people who know the value of time, and you are the kind of people who don’t know the value of time.”

“I have not,” retorted Mr. Childers, after surveying him from head to foot, “the honour of knowing you⁠—but if you mean that you can make more money of your time than I can of mine, I should judge from your appearance, that you are about right.”

“And when you have made it, you can keep it too, I should think,” said Cupid.

“Kidderminster, stow that!” said Mr. Childers. (Master Kidderminster was Cupid’s mortal name.)

“What does he come here cheeking us for, then?” cried Master Kidderminster, showing a very irascible temperament. “If you want to cheek us, pay your ochre at the doors and take it out.”

“Kidderminster,” said Mr. Childers, raising his voice, “stow that!⁠—Sir,” to Mr. Gradgrind, “I was addressing myself to you. You may or you may not be aware (for perhaps you have not been much in the audience), that Jupe has missed his tip very often, lately.”

“Has⁠—what has he missed?” asked Mr. Gradgrind, glancing at the potent Bounderby for assistance.

“Missed his tip.”

“Offered at the Garters four times last night, and never done ’em once,” said Master Kidderminster. “Missed his tip at the banners, too, and was loose in his ponging.”

“Didn’t do what he ought to do. Was short in his leaps and bad in his tumbling,” Mr. Childers interpreted.

“Oh!” said Mr. Gradgrind, “that is tip, is it?”

“In a general way that’s missing his tip,” Mr. E. W. B. Childers answered.

“Nine oils, Merrylegs, missing tips, garters, banners, and Ponging, eh!” ejaculated Bounderby, with his laugh of laughs. “Queer sort of company, too, for a man who has raised himself!”

“Lower yourself, then,” retorted Cupid. “Oh Lord! if you’ve raised yourself so high as all that comes to, let yourself down a bit.”

“This is a very obtrusive lad!” said Mr. Gradgrind, turning, and knitting his brows on him.

“We’d have had a young gentleman to meet you, if we had known you were coming,” retorted Master Kidderminster, nothing abashed. “It’s a pity you don’t have a bespeak, being so particular. You’re on the Tight-Jeff, ain’t you?”

“What does this unmannerly boy mean,” asked Mr. Gradgrind, eyeing him in a sort of desperation, “by Tight-Jeff?”

“There! Get out, get out!” said Mr. Childers, thrusting his young friend from the room, rather in the prairie manner. “Tight-Jeff or Slack-Jeff, it don’t much signify: it’s only tightrope and slack-rope. You were going to give me a message for Jupe?”

“Yes, I was.”

“Then,” continued Mr. Childers, quickly, “my opinion is, he will never receive it. Do you know much of him?”

“I never saw the man in my life.”

“I doubt if you ever will see him now. It’s pretty plain to me, he’s off.”

“Do you mean that he has deserted his daughter?”

“Ay! I mean,” said Mr. Childers, with a nod, “that he has cut. He was goosed last night, he was goosed the night before last, he was goosed today. He has lately got in the way of being always goosed, and he can’t stand it.”

“Why has he been⁠—so very much⁠—goosed?” asked Mr. Gradgrind, forcing the word out of himself, with great solemnity and reluctance.

“His joints are turning stiff, and he is getting used up,” said Childers. “He has his points as a Cackler still, but he can’t get a living out of them.”

“A Cackler!” Bounderby repeated. “Here we go again!”

“A speaker, if the gentleman likes it better,” said Mr. E. W. B. Childers, superciliously throwing the interpretation over his shoulder, and accompanying it with a shake of his long hair⁠—which all shook at once. “Now, it’s a remarkable fact, sir, that it cut that man deeper, to know that his daughter knew of his being goosed, than to go through with it.”

“Good!” interrupted Mr. Bounderby. “This is good, Gradgrind! A man so fond of his daughter, that he runs away from her! This is devilish good! Ha! ha! Now, I’ll tell you what, young man. I haven’t always occupied my present station of life. I know what these things are. You may be astonished to hear it, but my mother⁠—ran away from me.”

E. W. B. Childers replied pointedly, that he was not at all astonished to hear it.

“Very well,” said Bounderby. “I was born in a ditch, and my mother ran away from me. Do I excuse her for it? No. Have I ever excused her for it? Not I. What do I call her for it? I call her probably the very worst woman that ever lived in the world, except my drunken grandmother. There’s no family pride about me, there’s no imaginative sentimental humbug about me. I call a spade a spade; and I call the mother of Josiah Bounderby of Coketown, without any fear or any favour, what I should call her if she had been the mother of Dick Jones of Wapping. So, with this man. He is a runaway rogue and a vagabond, that’s what he is, in English.”

“It’s all the same to me what he is or what he is not, whether in English or whether in French,” retorted Mr. E. W. B. Childers, facing about. “I am telling your friend what’s the fact; if you don’t like to hear it, you can avail yourself of the open air. You give it mouth enough, you do; but give it mouth in your own building at least,” remonstrated E. W. B. with stern irony. “Don’t give it mouth in this building, till you’re called upon. You have got some building of your own I dare say, now?”

“Perhaps so,” replied Mr. Bounderby, rattling his money and laughing.

“Then give it mouth in your own building, will you, if you please?” said Childers. “Because this isn’t a strong building, and too much of you might bring it down!”

Eyeing Mr. Bounderby from head to foot again, he turned from him, as from a man finally disposed of, to Mr. Gradgrind.

“Jupe sent his daughter out on an errand not an hour ago, and then was seen to slip out himself, with his hat over his eyes, and a bundle tied up in a handkerchief under his arm. She will never believe it of him, but he has cut away and left her.”

“Pray,” said Mr. Gradgrind, “why will she never believe it of him?”

“Because those two were one. Because they were never asunder. Because, up to this time, he seemed to dote upon her,” said Childers, taking a step or two to look into the empty trunk. Both Mr. Childers and Master Kidderminster walked in a curious manner; with their legs wider apart than the general run of men, and with a very knowing assumption of being stiff in the knees. This walk was common to all the male members of Sleary’s company, and was understood to express, that they were always on horseback.

“Poor Sissy! He had better have apprenticed her,” said Childers, giving his hair another shake, as he looked up from the empty box. “Now, he leaves her without anything to take to.”

“It is creditable to you, who have never been apprenticed, to express that opinion,” returned Mr. Gradgrind, approvingly.

“I never apprenticed? I was apprenticed when I was seven year old.”

“Oh! Indeed?” said Mr. Gradgrind, rather resentfully, as having been defrauded of his good opinion. “I was not aware of its being the custom to apprentice young persons to⁠—”

“Idleness,” Mr. Bounderby put in with a loud laugh. “No, by the Lord Harry! Nor I!”

“Her father always had it in his head,” resumed Childers, feigning unconsciousness of Mr. Bounderby’s existence, “that she was to be taught the deuce-and-all of education. How it got into his head, I can’t say; I can only say that it never got out. He has been picking up a bit of reading for her, here⁠—and a bit of writing for her, there⁠—and a bit of ciphering for her, somewhere else⁠—these seven years.”

Mr. E. W. B. Childers took one of his hands out of his pockets, stroked his face and chin, and looked, with a good deal of doubt and a little hope, at Mr. Gradgrind. From the first he had sought to conciliate that gentleman, for the sake of the deserted girl.

“When Sissy got into the school here,” he pursued, “her father was as pleased as Punch. I couldn’t altogether make out why, myself, as we were not stationary here, being but comers and goers anywhere. I suppose, however, he had this move in his mind⁠—he was always half-cracked⁠—and then considered her provided for. If you should happen to have looked in tonight, for the purpose of telling him that you were going to do her any little service,” said Mr. Childers, stroking his face again, and repeating his look, “it would be very fortunate and well-timed; very fortunate and well-timed.”

“On the contrary,” returned Mr. Gradgrind. “I came to tell him that her connections made her not an object for the school, and that she must not attend any more. Still, if her father really has left her, without any connivance on her part⁠—Bounderby, let me have a word with you.”

Upon this, Mr. Childers politely betook himself, with his equestrian walk, to the landing outside the door, and there stood stroking his face, and softly whistling. While thus engaged, he overheard such phrases in Mr. Bounderby’s voice as “No. I say no. I advise you not. I say by no means.” While, from Mr. Gradgrind, he heard in his much lower tone the words, “But even as an example to Louisa, of what this pursuit which has been the subject of a vulgar curiosity, leads to and ends in. Think of it, Bounderby, in that point of view.”
